I'm here with Charlie Munger vice
chairman of Berkshire Hathaway Charlie
great to see you nice to be here I want
to continue with some of the questions
that people were asking you at the
annual meeting and start maybe with
China and trade and tariffs and you said
that even Trump can be right on some of
this stuff well yes when people get mad
enough at one politician they get
thinking everything he says and does is
wrong and that's never the case what
what would go ahead continue I'm sorry
and all I said was you don't want to be
such an absolute purist for free trade
I'm almost Epirus but not quite but I
wouldn't want the entire steel industry
or the United States to move offshore
there's someplace where you could draw a
line without ruining the world what
should our trade policy be then I mean
yes China can be unfair is unfair but
how would how should we pursue this well
I was entirely different from our
presidents I'm glad that we ran a big
trade deficit with China that enabled
them to rapidly get out of poverty and
obscurity I welcome the Chinese to the
group of advanced nations which I think
we enabled considerably by our
willingness to to trade with them as
they moved ever upward in terms of
complexity of enterprise so I like
what's happened I don't regard it as
unfair and bad I'm not saying that
that it would be unthinkable to have
some tariffs somewhere but basically I'm
a free trader and I'm particularly a
free trader in dealing with China and I
like the fact that free trade with China
has enabled China to expend so much and
they got out of poverty they had
hundreds of millions of people in rural
poverty and they made huge in the whole
history of the world no big nation has
ever advanced faster than China and this
free trade helped them do it and I like
it but aren't they unfair to us just to
follow up on you know actual problem
sure there are places where somebody in
China has some advantage over somebody
in the United States that you and I
might not like perfectly but that will
always happen but but basically the
Chinese broke the berkshire hathaway
shoe business in maine it disappeared
basically because their shoes were very
good and cheaper I'm not mad at China or
that and Berkshire has prospered it's
not so good for Maine but we can't help
it there's no way to make an advanced
civilization never hurt anybody
as it evolves there's a lot of talk
about an elephant that Berkshire is on
the hunt for a big acquisition could
that elephant be in China and if it was
could you even buy it given the
relationship between the two countries
right now
I don't think it's likely that we'll be
buying any great Chinese companies the
Chinese are very proud of their
companies they're proud of what they've
accomplished what I consider quite
likely is that we will invite be invited
to buy part of some great Chinese
company and just because they like the
good company and I think that is very
likely to happen at some time and we
would welcome what we own Minardi
positions in a lot of companies we don't
have an already position and BYD let me
ask you then about byd and Chinese cars
when will Chinese cars be allowed in the
United States and what's holding it up
is it bureaucracy well auto market is
very competitive and very fully occupied
and of course nobody in the United
States wants to lose our last two big
domestic suppliers manufacturers of
autos well three if you want to come
Ferrari Chrysler and so it's hard for
somebody new to come into the American
market big and and China has such a big
market of its own that my guess is
though stay busy in their own part of
the world for a long time so that's not
a priority for BYD oby DS biggest
advantages in the electric cars where
they're so close to the cutting edge of
battery technology and so they'd be
crazy not to emphasize the hybrid in the
electric cars over the gasoline cars not
that he'll go out of the gasoline market
but i think they will be biggest in the
hybrid and electric cars
speaking of electric vehicles what do
you think about Tesla is that company
going to become a major player well
it's already created more significance
than anybody would have predicted and
its founder is bold and brilliant and
swings for the fences and of course
people like that get some remarkable
results and sometimes they get some
quick failure and I haven't the faintest
idea how yeah unless he's gonna turn out
but I think he's got a considerable
chance of success and a considerable
chance of failure he seems to like it
that way
have you considered overnight Elon Musk
getting into the candy businesses he
suggested he might do on Twitter I
didn't hear that it sounds like wise I'm
sorry I can't criticize anybody else for
wise essary let's talk about shift gears
a little bit and talk about the
single-payer health care system that you
mentioned and I think you said that when
the Democrats if / when the Democrats
controlled both houses and the
presidency Oh we'd have to be that all
three okay so but you really I think it
will happen okay I mean every other
advanced Western nation has it different
types no I don't think my prediction is
that radical so it could happen in two
years even and we will start having
actually everybody is disenchanted with
the bureaucracy I'm cost and foolish
results in our own culture our own
medical system is that an instance where
bureaucracy has just taken over an
entire industry bureaucracy plus
entrenched interests were profiting on
this an existing system of various way I
come from California if everybody in the
nation had Kaiser health care as we have
it in California the net quality of
medicine in the United States would go
way up and Kaiser has never been able to
succeed very much outside of California
because the entrenched vested interests
stomp on it because of its success in
California you're talking about a field
where the entrenched interests are
making a lot of money they don't want
the change you wouldn't either of your
livelihood depended on and so of course
it's very hard to change our system
the reason the Singapore system is so
much better than ours is they didn't
have a lot of entrenched interests there
were that powerful and and they had a
brilliant leader where system costs
about a fifth of what ours cost and
serves better is the healthcare endeavor
that you're working on with JP Morgan
the berkshires working on with JP Morgan
and Amazon could that be a template or
evolve into a single payer system no I
think a single payer system comes
because the government ordained sit so I
think all they're trying to do is make
the existent existing system better
you remember that john deere our control
over the first by spending fifty million
dollars way back decades ago utterly
revolutionized American medical care he
got all the charlatans out of the
medical profession by changing all the
state laws and he and all the medical
schools and would take Johns Hopkins
which had notated Germany and when his
fifty million dollars was spent the
whole of American medicine improved
enormously no he did that as a public
service and and not many people realize
how much public service JD rock and roll
the first created and so what Berkshire
and its partners are trying to do is a
little bit like Rockefeller did oh and
none of them would be doing this just to
make money this is a public service
activity so that was somewhat of an
inspiration what is for me I don't know
they may have had three different
aspirations but I've always admired
Miller did and the man who talked to him
to it Simon Flexner also created
Einsteins home with the advanced that
Institute and Princeton but it was a
huge Bill Gates who's such an
interesting man all he hopes to do is
someday do about half as much as rocker
brother did he knows how what an
achievement that was the timing was
perfect let me ask you about Wells Fargo
it sounded like you and Warren or
standing by your bank at this point but
I wonder you know at what point is
enough enough and how do you decide when
a company is just okay this is not going
to turn around we're going to abandon
ship here well I don't think for a
minute that Wells Fargo is in any way
rotten to the core
they just had some incentive programs
that that caused some bad behavior and
then they reacted reacted poorly to
trouble when it came so they made
mistakes of judgment but I think you'll
find them that they hate what's happened
so much there'll be less likely to make
mistakes in the future and not more
likely I actually think this is good for
well sortable I'm a very long term basis
it's agony to go through but but they're
gonna be better for it let me ask you
about Ted Weschler and Todd combs and
you and especially Warren talked them up
and say what great managers they are and
and how smart they are and I guess the
proof will be in the pudding at some
point down the road
do you see eye to eye with their
investing philosophy
I don't even follow a lot of it just
because one of them bites some security
doesn't mean I start studying at great
length but I know them well they
contributed enormous ly because they're
talking to Warren all the time
and as I said at the meeting he's way
better for it so am i we would not have
bought that Apple stock if one of the
young investors had not steered us that
way
so does he have an orange conclusion in
the end but it was prompted by one of
the young men they've been enormous ly
constructive and they helped in a whole
lot of ways they both think totally
about the shareholder interest people
coming from investments or marvel's
securities are always thinking about
what's good for the shareholders and
they're just a marvelous influence to
have somebody to people smart and young
around Berkshire with that extreme
orientation and they're not just doing
pretty well with the money they're
investing there favorably influencing
the investment there they're not in
charge of for instance the Apple
investment but would in other words does
it changed the investing philosophy of
Berkshire so Berkshire and Warren and
you were known as value investors is
that not the core discipline of
Berkshire Hathaway anymore or does that
not even matter you gotta remember in
our way of thinking all intelligence
investment is value investment because
why would you want to buy something
which wasn't worth as much as you were
paying for it and who wouldn't like
buying something for less than it's
worth
so the only difference when people talk
about value in destiny you're always
being a value investor now there are
various ways to look for value
investments just as their various places
to fish and of the fourth first rule of
fishing is to fish where the fish are
the first rule of value investing is to
find someplace to fish for value
investment
where there are a lot of them and of
course it's gotten hard in the United
States to find easy value investments
because the world is so competitive and
that accounts for a lot of what you see
in Berkshire where we buy securities
like Apple what we wouldn't have bought
in the old days when we had more mundane
things that we're serving us very well
so we're just looking in different
places but where value investors and so
they can some people may say value
investor they mean somebody that
emphasizes working capital or something
meaning they should use the fish in that
particular place but I think that's all
I think it's a bad use of the language
to think there's a difference between
value investor vesting and other good
and investing all good investing is
value investing by definition and so
what they're just various places to fish
for value investments and of course as
the world gets tougher you have to fish
in places you didn't fish before and so
the idea with Apple then is that there's
value there that's unrecognized by the
market different kind of value investing
and one with which were less familiar
wouldn't have bought it if we didn't
think it was a good investment let me
ask you about one of your favorite
subjects nowadays I think maybe it's
Bitcoin and I know you've had some
unpleasant things to say about it but
but is there anything there to it at all
Charlie I mean it should we just
dismissed the whole thing well Bitcoin
as a
the computer science behind that's fine
bitcoin is a great triumph for the human
mind
that's what captivates a lot of these
people they've actually created a
product that's hard to create more of
but not impossible now that is very
peculiar but they've managed to do it so
a lot of the computer
computer science people love it just
because it's such an extreme achievement
of computer science I of course have no
interest in that because it's not my
subject and I see an artificial
speculative medium that people are
buying just because they think they can
sell to somebody else at the higher
price even though it inherently has no
intrinsic value and so I regard the
whole business as antisocial stupid
immoral immoral yes is that why why
would you trade suppose you could make a
lot of money trading freshly harvested
baby brands would you do it or would you
say that's immoral
you wouldn't trade em would you - it's
too awful a concept well to me bitcoin
is almost as bad it's not having any
desirable social purpose
we've got debit cards isn't like we
don't have a payment system we've got
WeChat in China incredibly efficient
payment system China doesn't need
Bitcoin and if you have a wee chat why
would you do it in a medium where the
value changes enormous ly nobody's right
mind would want a payment system where
the very thing you were using went up
and down by 20% in the day no I regard
the thing as a as a combination of
dementia and immorality and I think the
people that are pushing it are a
disgrace
that ought to be some things that are
beneath you you just don't do and this
is one we did not need a gold
certificate
I made a gold substitute like this last
year when we talked Charlie you
mentioned that Donald Trump exhibited a
form of sickness I think is how you
characterize it I think it came you were
characterizing his his personality and
his behavior it's been another year
since he's been in office and I wonder
how you would assess him well I am a
load because I consider it
counterproductive to hate as much as
both parties now hate and I have
disciplined myself and I now regard all
politicians higher than I used to I did
that as a matter of self-preservation
the other thing I did to make me feel
better about the current scene is I
reread the decline and fall of the Roman
Empire and it goes on for a great many
hundreds of pages and that made me feel
a lot better about the current political
scene we're way ahead of the Romans at
the end that's a pretty low bar well I
didn't it's very helpful I suggest you
try it you will feel better about the
present world if you look at that one
and you said you elevated politicians
yeah make yourself feel something it's
counterproductive to hate so much all of
us on both sides are getting to hate so
much too much and I've decided I'm gonna
back off man how do we resolve it we
don't have to resolve it they all pass
are the old saying this too will pass
they all go away I have a different rule
about politicians they are never so bad
you don't live to want them back there
will come a time when those people will
hate Trump will wish that he were back
I don't think I'll live to see it like
competently predict that will happen
that's interesting well if you look at
the whole scan in human history and
people who led it there are a lot of bad
leaders okay why don't we leave it at
that charlie munger vice chairman of
Berkshire Hathaway thanks very much for
taking the time all right